my master's degree, and then to get a PhD. And I had
to validate all of these courses that I took in 1937
and 38, 39.
Professor Hunt was ag eco teacher. And I went to him
and I said, Dr. Hunt, I need to validate your
course. And he reached over and gave me a book. and
said, take this. And I read that book for three
hours. And there wasn't a thing in that book that I
knew anything about. So I took it back to him. And I
said, I didn't take this course. He said, oh, what
course did you take? And I said, well, I took the
course on cooperatives. He said, oh, yes, I
remember. And he gave me a test on it. And I had had
contact with one of the Grange field officers who
went to Washington to lobby for the Granger. That
was the name of an organization, wasn't it?
Incidentally, he was from Granger. And he took me
to eat dinner one day in Austin and ordered steak
mignon. And that's the first time I ever saw one of
them. But I kept in touch with him, and I spent my
time doing my work, and I got acquainted with
Pakistanis. With whom? Pakistanis, East
Pakistan. Yes, sir. And I was very familiar with
one student, and he got to A&M three months after
the two months after the courses had started that
meant in october something or other and i helped
him catch up in genetics so we became friends and we
were friends while he was there and the fact that i
knew him as well as i did led me to want to go to where
he was, and I did in 1955, and spent nearly two years
in Pakistan before I came back to start teaching
genetics in 57. All right, now, did you finish your
PhD? Right. In what? Animal breeding. Animal
breeding. And where did you all live during those
years in College Station? We lived in the barracks
that they had moved in. Describe life for a veteran
in those barracks. Well, we had two bedrooms and
four kids, and we got a bed rail, and we put bunk beds
in one room, for our four children, and my wife and I
slept in the other. And she got a job and worked
while I was there. After we'd been there, I didn't
get enough on my GI to feed the family. Now these
were, you said the barracks, this was over at
College View? Right. Do you remember what the rent
was? Because I don't know that. I don't know that.
It wasn't very much. Somebody asked me one time,
well, can you live with four kids in College View?
And I said, well, you can if you needed to do it as
best as I did.
But after I'd been there for a while, we saw Qazi
quite often. And he invited us to all of the
Pakistani functions.
He got a telegram one day and came to our house at
noon to eat lunch with us. And when we sat down to the
table, he handed me a telegram. And this telegram
said, your wife will arrive in New York City at such
and such a time and said, attend her arrival. And
that time specified was four hours before he
handed me that telegram. Well, obviously he
couldn't go to New York to meet her, so I suggested
that Traveler's Aid would help us. And I called the
Traveler's Aid and asked them if they would take
care of his wife. And he talked to his wife, and all
he could hear was boo-hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo. And so we
had to go and get a money order to send to Traveler's
Aid to pay her transportation from New York to
Houston. And by the time we got those arrangements
made and took off for Houston, we got to Houston at
the same time his wife got to Houston. And we took
care of him for 18 months or more, his wife and
daughter. His daughter went to school in College
Station. Now, the campus in those days was
crowded, wasn't it? Not very compared with what it
is now. No, but compared with what it had been
before World War II. You bet. And where did you all
do your shopping, and where did the kids play?
Well... the kids played with the other kids in the
project house. But our kids were all of school age
except one. And we had to have a neighbor to babysit
the youngest one while the rest of them went to
school and both of us went to work. And where'd
y'all shop? Mostly at a big grocery store right at
the bend of the road up there in Bryan. Oh, Wine
Gardens. Wine Gardens. And we sometimes shopped
at the store. O'ers? Yeah. And were you all
churchgoers in that era? Yes, sir. Where
described the church? We went to A&M, to the church
that was there next to the campus. Church Christ?
Yes, sir. Who were the key teachers and advisors
that helped you as a graduate student? Bob Schrode
comes to mind first. Who? Bob Schrode. S-C-H-R-O?
No, S-H-R-O-D-E. S-H-R-O. He was the chairman of
my committee. Okay. Mr. Godby was on my committee.
And whenever they started setting up my program,
he sat there just like I, he didn't know what was
going on. And finally he said, look here, he said,
you people have set up for a Ph.D. so many hours.
Don't you think that's ridiculous? Let's cut that
back down. And he eliminated 40 hours that they
thought I ought to have to have a Ph.D. Now then,
language, two languages are required. And There
was a man that came over from Austin to teach
German. And I enrolled in this course and got my
credit. And somebody decided they weren't going
to give him credit. And I went to Dr. Morgan and
said, look here, and told him what happened. And he
said, that is acceptable, and I'll write the dean
that it is acceptable.
When I started Spanish, I got a Spanish book on
agriculture. And on the first page, I had to look up
so many words. And then on the second page, I had to
look up so many words. And when I got to page 25, I
took the written test on Spanish and passed that
Spanish. But it didn't take long if you didn't
devote your time to anything but studying
Spanish. to be able to read page 151, 52, so that I
passed both of those that way. Was O.D. Butler a
member of the department then? He was head of the
Animal Science Department. All right. Did you
ever have any association with him as a graduate
student? Not particularly. All right. You
finished your work then in 55? I finished
it Christmas of 1954. 54. And then what did you do
next? Well, A&M had sent a group of people to East
Pakistan on September the 1st. H.E. Hampton of the
agronomy department was the head of that group.
But there had been a Pakistani over here who was
head of the, he was director of education in East
Pakistan. And he visited with me quite a bit
because Qazi told him who I was. And so after I
finished whatever I had to do, Then I was
picked when somebody else didn't make the team.
Somebody was turned down, and McElroy was the name
of the man that was going. But they found out he had
been in India, and they wouldn't have anybody that
had been in India to come to Pakistan. So they put me
on as a consultant. and assigned me to in East
Pakistan. When we got there, we lived in a house
with a man that was single and he had part of the
building and we had part of the building and we
didn't move to . We got there in January and it took
me from January to April to get his house ready for
us to move into. And I got very well acquainted with
Nero Amin. He was at one time the high muckety muck
in East Pakistan, but his party had been defeated
in the last election. But he was a fantastic
individual and owned the house that we were to rent
in Myman Singh. Jane had an attack of
appendicitis. We took her over about midnight to
the doctor there. And the doctor said, well, she's
got appendicitis. And said, I don't recommend the
DACA hospital. You go to Mime and Sing. There's a
nun running a hospital in Mime and Sing. So I put her
on the train. And we got to Mime and Sing about
midnight. went to the hospital and they bedded me
down in one place and put Jane in another place.
They started to get her out to go to surgery and she
said, look, I'm not going to surgery until I see my
husband. So they woke me up before Jane went for her
operation and she never did go back to Miami, to
DACA.
I went back to DACA and got the kids and brought them
to Miami City. And y'all were over in Pakistan how
long? Well, we got there in January of 1954, I
guess.
We didn't stay quite two years. We lacked about
three months of being two years. And the purpose of
that project was to do what? we were advisors to the
college that we were assigned to. And since my
master's degree was in education, it was
compatible for the place that I was to be assigned.
And we got to Miami and Sing in April, and we left a
year and from April to August. We left in August of
the 57, no 56, to come home. And Mr. Godby had
already offered me the job, but I couldn't get
home. When I got home, it was already filled, and so
I had to teach school one half year in Rosebud. I
looked around College Station, couldn't find
anything. enlarge my area until i got a job at
rosebud all right and then after that half year you
came back right i started teaching february 1957
as a professor of genetics genetics right and i'm
not going to ask pay any other time what was that
beginning salary
well now it wasn't as much as i got when i was in
pakistan Mr. Godby started teaching at A&M when
salaries were not very high, and he didn't
consider, and I was underpaid the whole time that I
was there. What were your duties? Teaching
genetics. No, but what courses and how many and so
on? Well, I taught only one course at A&M. What was
that? Genetics 301. And that was animal? No, that
was all. Right. Every bit and four. seven or eight
years, we had one genetics course, and anybody
that had genetics on their plan had to take
genetics. And they finally hired a young man to
help because my classes were so big. And I proposed
to him that instead of having one class for him and
two for me, that we team teach it. And so I gave him
the last one-third of the course, which meant that
I taught two-thirds of the class and then I was not,
I was able to pursue other interests from then
until the end of the school year. And I taught the
course in the summer the same way. And normally how
many were in your sections? How big were they? When
I started teaching, there was an average of 19 in
each class. And whenever they hired him, my
classes had gotten to be where there was at least
500 students each term. I taught over 11,000
students at A&M. Some of them one time, some of them
two times, one three times that I know of, one four
times. What were your guidelines as a teacher? How
did you approach that task? Well, to one extent or
another, I taught the same course in genetics that
I was taught when Dr. Humbert was head of the
department. But in the meantime, when we got into
the molecular genetics, I had not any background
at all And I was thrilled when the young man came in
and took over that third of the course. I had taught
it, but I had to teach it not as something I knew, but
as something that I had learned to follow the
sequence. I don't think the course changed, but
they had a better teacher that last third than I
was. And they thought, including the animal
husband, the department head, that he would come
and show me up. And when they started talking about
genetics and so forth, they asked him what he
thought about McNeil, and he said, look, I just
came from the fountainhead of genetics, and
genetics, McNeil's a mess. best genetics teacher
I've ever seen. He got his PhD at Illinois. I mean,
at Cornell. He'd gotten his undergraduate in
Illinois. What were the guidelines that you gave
to your classes about how they should approach
their work?
Well, I don't exactly know. There's one or two
things that I had more than one student to tell me
that they didn't know how to study and how to get
along until they took their genetics course. And I
had one student by the name of Rick Perry. And after
he got into politics, I made a point to get in touch
with him. He and Kay Bailey Hutchinson came to Waco
for a Lincoln Day dinner, and I stayed at the back.
And he recognized me. I went to the back door as they
were leaving, and he recognized me when he was as
far away as that cabinet is over there. And I said,
well, Rick, he said, Dr. McNeil said you taught
genetics and said your course was the one that made
me realize I didn't want to be a veterinarian. And
I've had contact with Rick quite a lot since then.
But you had, I'm sure you had some policies about
people that cut class too often or went to sleep.
How did you handle those things? Man missed class.
I always started today's lesson with where I left
off. Made a reference lesson. to the last lesson.
And I had one student that came every other day, and
when I was talking about reviewing for everybody,
he was asking questions. And I called him in. I
said, young man, I said, you ask questions when I
don't want questions on that. I've already taught
that. And I want you to know that his attendance was
perfect the rest of the year. And I checked my
students every day. And the first day of class I
said, look, no shoes, no shirt, no class. I
explained that at the beginning of the class. What
about going to sleep in class?
Well, I didn't have too many to go to sleep in class,
I'll tell you that. One guy went to sleep and he had
on glasses. dark glasses, and everybody got up and
walked out, and he was still asleep. I told one of
the students to wake him up, and the student said,
you wake him up, you put him to sleep. But that weird
sense of humor. But
I used a lot of illustrations that were known to me.
I don't know. Crossing over is something that's
really important. And when you have crossing
over, you have a break in one chromosome and a break
in another, and these swap and heal back this way.
And I told them about a cousin of mine whose hand was
badly burned, and where there was burned space
here and here, that they grew together just like
the chromosomes
grow together after their ends are broken. And
they said, you have a lot of peculiar relatives one
time. But,
I don't know. Did you have, as a teacher, did you
have anyone in your past that was kind of your
model?
Not really. I didn't admire Dr. Humbert too much.
Mr. Godby was my god, I'll tell you that. And
I guess I wrote my own. Who were your closest
associates and buddies as faculty members? L.A.
Maddox. His office was on the end of the building.
M-A-D-D-U-X or O-X? O-X. He was an extension beef
cattle man. I was in animal industries. And the
toilet on that floor was through the same door that
I went to my office. And when he'd come down to go to
the toilet and it was already occupied, well then
we'd talk together until he got an open space. But
L.A. and I were real good friends. And when he told,
when
girls were admitted to the genetics class, he came
by and said, well, there's one thing about it, says
you're one of the few professors that have got to,
don't have to change his language since girls are
gonna be in your class. And that was true. You
mentioned co-education. Do you remember any
discussion by you and your friends before women
were admitted seriously? Do you remember people
talking about the possibility of women being
admitted? I can't say that I really I mean my own
opinion was my own and since I knew it was contrary
to Rutter's I didn't communicate with many people
about it. Let's talk about the leadership of A&M.
The president when you joined the faculty was Dr.
Morgan. That's right. What was your evaluation of
him? I thought he was great. I don't know why he
left, but I was sorry to see him go. Did you hear him
very often speak or see him much? Not much contact
with him. The only time I had contact with him was
when I went to talk to him about the German course
that had been taught at A&M for all these years. And
they suddenly decided this won't do. Because as I
understand, in hindsight, he favored
co-education and making the Corps voluntary. And
that that wasn't popular with the board at that
point. I can understand that. I agree that that
statement might very well be applicable. When
Mr. Rutter was first appointed, do you remember
any initial impression you all had of him? Well,
he was not really highly regarded, and it was felt
that he was a political appointee, and that
he had to learn on the job if he did anything. Do you
remember hearing any of his early speeches? Well,
I've heard a few of them, and I was told that the best
speech he ever made was at Project House Reunion,
the first one we had in 69. And I don't know whether
that, I mean, see, when I first started that work,
I got in touch with a bunch of people, and whenever
they had the reunion, I invited all of the old
professors to come to the reunion and so forth. And
it was former faculty members who left there
saying that Rudder made the best speech I ever
heard him make at the project house. And they told
me in the Association of Former Students that
Project House Reunion had more cohesion and so
forth than any other group, including any core
people, than did anybody on the campus. Why do you
think the Project House graduates had that?
because they had very little regard for A&M. They
did not have the loyalty for A&M that the other
students did because they'd been discriminated
and had such a hard time getting through school.
That's the reason. Of course, whenever they built
the project houses over there and put students in
them, they were more readily accepted than they
had been when they were living in Navasota and
Bryan and so forth. Incidentally, my mother was a
project house housekeeper for four years at A&M.
Please describe that.
They had a McClendon County house and a good many
boys not all but there was some boys from Moody and I
just don't really know I think Russell probably
invited her and daddy was out of a job so Russell
asked her if she'd be a project house homemaker and
she was she had the McLennan County house one year
and it disbanded and then she had the Erath County
House at 208 North Houston for three or four years.
And they came over there from Huntsville and asked
Russell about getting somebody to go to Sam
Houston as the room, the matron for the band house
at Huntsville, and she was there a couple of years.
All right, during that four years, she was the...
And what would be house mother? Is that what they
were called for the project houses? Yes, sir. Do
you remember what her compensation was? A dollar a
student per month. But she had 31 students in a
bigger house. And her duties were what? Well, her
duty was to purchase, prepare, and set the tables.
And they had somebody hired to do the dishwashing.
Because I don't know of any project house anywhere
that had the students doing the dishwashing. Did
she have to keep the house, to clean the house, or
anything like that? Each student was responsible
for their own. They had a manager for each house.
And it was his responsibility to do the buying and
to make sure that the boys kept their room clean and
so forth. How did she feel about the way the project
house students respected her, treated her? Well,
she was treated very well. The students respected
and I'd say loved their house mother. I only knew of
one case where the students were down on the house
by then, and they moved out. Do you think she was
proud to have that association? Yes, she was. I
want you to know that when you're 55 years old, as my
daddy was, there wasn't a terrific demand in those
Depression days. And when she was living in
Huntsville, my daddy worked from 7 until 7. every
night at a filling station for a dollar. Now, she
was the project house mother for when, what
period? About the first year.
She ended in about the first year of the World War
II. Oh, so from about 36 to 41, something like that?
No, then she was from 37, perhaps. 30, okay. So
right after you graduated from A&M? It was maybe a
year and a part of it, some, after I graduated.
Okay.
Describe some, when you were on the A&M faculty,
describe some of your extracurricular
activities with the students. Well, I was advisor
to the Alpha Zeta, and I was advisor to 10 freshmen
in agriculture, and I was advisor to the Young
Republicans, and I was advisor to another club. I
don't remember. Were you involved with the
judging teams? No, not involved with them.
Describe Alpha Zeta and its work. Well, Alpha Zeta
is a national... Agricultural Students
Organization. And the students
select somebody from the School of Agriculture to
be the advisor. And the first year you're just a
common, the second year you become junior
advisor, and the third year you become the head
advisor. And so I spent three years as
agricultural advisor for the agricultural Alpha
Zeta.
Do you remember some of those youngsters with
pride? Oh, you bet. Among them was
Fred McClure. Did he? He was in Alpha Z. Make
believe that I didn't know Fred McClure. Describe
him as a student. Well, I didn't have him as a
student. No, describe him as a young man. He was a
leader in whatever he took part in. What made him a
leader? Well, one thing.
He had the right kind of personality, and he was
willing to take charge of something when
something needed to be done. And he was president
of the student body. Did he have a good speaking
ability? Great. He made the speech at the Future
Farmer Banquet the year before he came to A&M. And
he did not have any contact with me as a teacher, but
my only contact was through Republican politics
in Alphazade. What about as a sense of humor? Did he
have a sense of humor? I don't really remember
that. Oh, it was superb. Great, great, great sense
of humor. I had a student write on the bottom of his
opinionaire page, you sure do have a weird
S-I-N-C-E of humor. And I nearly fell out of my
chair when I read that. That's good. That's a good
Aggie story. Yeah, it is. That's a good Aggie
story.
When you were a faculty member, did the students
ever try to play any pranks? Share some of those.
Well, my class was strict one time. I guess I was the
only professor that was strict. Was this during
coeducational days? No. These were all male?
Yeah.
In the mechanical engineering building,
petroleum engineering building, there was two
doors in the room and there was a desk behind these
two doors and the board was here.
And
After quiz A, two medical students came to me and
said, we didn't study for quiz A and we both made
poor grades on quiz A. And said, we want to take a
makeup. And I said, look, if you've taken that
quiz, that goes in the grade sheet. They said,
look, we'll take you to Houston and take you to a
ball game down there and give you plenty to drink
and then we'll go out to this outstanding house out
there, fish house out there, and we'll buy you the
best dinner they've got. I said, I'm not
interested. But it did make them known to me.
And after
a few, oh, maybe two months, I'd pass out exercise
sheets. If they could work those exercise sheets
that I prepared for them, and I'd place them on the
front desk, and people would come by and pick them
up and go home and work them, and that prepared them
for the test. And one day, one of the students came
to get his exercise sheet, but instead of going
back to his seat, he went out the door back of me.
And I was halfway through the quiz when I had my back
seat turned to the class, writing on the board, and
I heard clap, clap, clap, clap, about four steps or
five, and the noise stopped.
And I turned around and I didn't say anything. But I
looked up at this student's seat and he wasn't in
it. So I told the student
that was his roommate to tell so-and-so to come see
me. And I told the class that I wasn't going to give
any grades on the exam until I found out who was the
guilty party. And so he didn't come, and he didn't
come, and finally I told his roommate to have him
come see me, and he didn't come. And finally I
caught him going out of place, and I said, you come
see me today. And he came in and he said he was
determined not to admit anything. And I said to
him, I said, well, young man, I hold your career in
my hand. You're a medical student. And if your
major professor, Dr. Gravitt, ever finds out that
you streak my class, your future's not very
bright. And he said, I was still determined not to
say anything. And I put him down in front of me and I
said, well, said the man that streaked my class hat
on a red jockey strap. He said, no sir, it was a
maroon jockey strap. And I said, well, now you
understand that you've done something that has
really gonna cost you and your career. Dr. Gravitt
won't stand for this. But I didn't report him to Dr.
Gravitt. But somebody did because Gravitt never
let him go to medical school. He finally went to
what is this other thing? It's osteopath school.
And both he and his friend got degrees at some
osteopath college. And one of them was practicing
in Conroe. And I was going to Conroe frequently
because they had a club over there. So when I got
ready to retire, I went to his friend in Conroe, and
I said, look, I want to send an invitation to
so-and-so to come to my graduation dinner. And he
told me where he was, and I sent the letter to this
guy that was in the Army in Illinois, and he replied
to it. He had a little different scenario than I had
because he didn't see it exactly like I did, but it
was really an interesting letter and I have got
that in my memoir. I think that answers your
question, I think. What about some other tricks or
pranks the students attempted? You know, I don't
remember any other particular ones. Nobody wrote
anything on the board before you got to class? No,
sir, I don't remember that. Did any student ever
come by and try to bribe you? I think these two boys
were the only ones that ever really tried to bribe
me. Did anybody
try to high pressure you about a grade? Some
politician? How did they do that? Well, I gave two
sets of quizzes to every class. And the answers on
this row and the answers on this row were
different. And whenever somebody turned in a
paper on this row with answers all on this row, they
didn't get a grade. And I had one or two people to
come in and complain about that. It didn't do them
any good, but I had a little girl come in to complain
that she would have done anything I asked of her.
But I knew better than to ask of her. But that's an
impression that I had. Did any politician or
university administrator try to influence your
grades ever? Ever. No, never. And I only got one bad
note.
I turned in my grades at 5 o'clock, and they should
have been in at 1 o'clock, and I got a letter of reply
by endorsement. And I probably did, but my
secretary had misinformed me as to when they had to
be in. So I wrote a letter of reply by endorsement.
You mentioned you were active with the young
Republicans. Describe your activity in the
community and on the campus as a leader of the local
Republican party. Well,
when I first got there and started teaching in 57, I
went to a, precinct meeting just because I wanted
to find out what was going on. It was at Phil Good's
house. I know you know that name. And I found out
that all of the Republicans that were active there
were members of the John Birch Society. And I did
not I did not want to make my membership in the
Republican Party dependent upon the John Birch
Society. So I did not affiliate with the John Birch
faction. And I would have my friends write in my
name for precinct chairman. I never tried to put my
name on the ticket. But my friends would write in my
name that I'd get enough votes to be precinct
chairman and I'd go to the county chairman and we'd
elect delegates to the state. But I didn't dare go
to a state Republican convention until 1966. Why
not? I thought there's too much involved.
Did you feel that it was inappropriate for a
faculty member to do that? It's inappropriate for
Republican members. Oh, you mean... Yes, I do.
With the Democratic majority. George Raper in the
Postal Department was Democratic chairman for
years, but they didn't want anybody on the faculty
to be Republican. And I think I told you that when I
was elected county chairman that the secretary of
the school board, Cherry, asked me to come see him.
And I conducted the election for the Brazos County
party. And after Clements was elected, he called
me and said it wouldn't be necessary for me to come
see him. But I felt very strongly that Republicans
were not They were not tolerated. Did any student
ever say anything about your being politically
active? No. Did anybody else anywhere near the
university administration ever say anything?
Never said anything. You see, there's an old man
that was county chairman.
And then he got crossways somehow with somebody I
don't really know. And I don't even remember his
name. But he had a fuss with somebody and resigned.
And I got all the precinct chairman together and
only one person voted against me. And that was a
woman who thought she was a big Republican, but She
really didn't know. She said in the thing, well,
you don't invite the young people enough. And I
took Gay's son and two or three other people to
state conventions with me to give them, you know,
Gordon Gay's young son. And to one extent or
another, I invited their participation.
When Bush was there in 70, I had, I thought, an
extremely good politician. And I introduced him
to George Bush and recommended him as a staff
member in 1970 when he was on the campus. And he
interviewed this young man and offered him a job.
Well, whenever this young man told the people that
he had been sort of working for while he was in
school, that he had been offered this. They said,
well, we'll give you the same thing George Bush
does. And he's now president of the Agricultural
Teachers Insurance Company. And Marcus Hill and I
have been real close ever since then. What's his
name? Marcus Hill. M-A-R-C-U-S. H-I-L-L. Marcus
Hill. And about several years ago, he invited Jane
and I to come to one of their board meetings.